---
layout: single
title: "(A1) Riemann integral"
categories: mathematics
tags: [analysis, Riemann integral, Riemann]
use_math: true
publish: false
author_profile: false
toc: true
---

Stein 책에는 리만적분에 대한 내용이 Appendix의 첫 장으로 되어 있다.
본문의 2장은 리만적분을 가정하고 진행하고 있으므로 이에 대해 정리해보았다.

가장 먼저는, 리만적분에 관한 기본적인 사실들을 인터넷으로 찾아보다가, nontrivial한 사실인 적분가능한 두 함수의 곱이 적분가능하다는 사실을 증명해보려고 하다가, baby rudin의 6장을 다시 읽어보게 되었다.
baby rudin은 Stieltjies 적분까지 포함한 논의를 하고 있어서 좀 복잡하지만, 그래도 찬찬히 읽어보니 필요한 내용을 다 정리할 수 있겠다 싶었다.
그런데 Stein의 2장을 계속 읽다보니 해당 책의 Appendix의 1장 (이상 Stein A1)에 해당 내용이 정리되어있다는 걸 보고 거길 읽어보았다.
Stein A1이 훨씬 간결하게, 꼭 필요한 내용들만 있는데다가, 기본적으로 Rudin 책의 내용과 거의 비슷하기 때문에, Stein A1을 정리하려고 한다.

<!-- <div class="notice--info" markdown="1"> -->
<!-- <div class="notice--success" markdown="1"> -->
<!-- <a href="#" class="btn btn--primary">proof</a> -->
<!-- <a href="#" class="btn btn--primary">QED</a> -->

# Appendix 1. Riemann Integral

<div class="notice--info" markdown="1">
<br><br>
</div>

Let $f:[a,b]\to\mathbb R$ be bounded.
A *partition* of $[a,b]$ is a sequence $(x_0,x_1,\cdots,x_{N-1},x_N)$ where

$$a=x_0\lt x_1\lt\cdots\lt x_{N-1}\lt x_N=b.$$

The upper sum $\mathcal U(f,P)$ and lower sum $\mathcal L(f,P)$ of $f$ with respect to $P$ are

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal U(f,P)
&=\sum_{j=1}^N\sup\{f(x):x_{j-1}\le x\le x_j\}(x_j-x_{j-1})\\
\mathcal L(f,P)
&=\sum_{j=1}^N\inf\{f(x):x_{j-1}\le x\le x_j\}(x_j-x_{j-1})\\
\end{aligned}
$$

All the supremums and infimums exist since $f$ is bounded.
It is immediate that $\mathcal U(f,P)\ge\mathcal L(f,P)$.

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Definition </b>

$f$ is said to be *(Riemann) integrable* if for every $\epsilon\gt0$, there exists $P$ such that

$$(\mathcal U-\mathcal L)(f,P)\lt\epsilon.$$

</div>

If another partition $P'$ of $[a,b]$ is a subset of $P$ where we conceive $P$ and $P'$ as sets, then $P'$ is called a *refinement* of $P$.
It is clear that

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Proposition </b>

if $P'$ is a refinement of $P$, then $\mathcal U(f,P')\le\mathcal U(f,P)$ and $\mathcal L(f,P')\ge\mathcal L(f,P)$.

</div>
To sketch the proof of it, let $P=(a,b)$ and $P'=(a,c,b)$ are two partition of $[a,b]$.
Then,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal U(f,P')
&=\sup\{f(x):a\le x\le c\}(c-a) + \sup\{f(x):c\le x\le b\}(b-c)\\
&\le\sup\{f(x):a\le x\le b\}(c-a) + \sup\{f(x):a\le x\le b\}(b-c)\\
&=\sup\{f(x):a\le x\le b\}(b-a)\\
&=\mathcal U(f,P)
\end{aligned}
$$

Similarly, $\mathcal L(f,P')\ge\mathcal L(f,P)$ holds for the same $P$ and $P'$.
<a href="#" class="btn btn--primary">QED</a>

Let

$$U=\inf_P\mathcal U(f,P),\quad L=\sup_P\mathcal L(f,P).$$

Such $U$ and $L$ always exist since $f$ is bounded.
Moreover,

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Proposition </b>

$f$ is integrable if and only if $U=L$.

</div>

Suppose the former.
It is trivial that $U\ge L$.
Fix $\epsilon\gt0$.
Since $f$ is integrable, there exists a partition $P$ such that

$$\mathcal U(f,P)-\mathcal L(f,P)\lt\epsilon$$

Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
U-L
&=\inf_P\mathcal U(f,P)-\sup_P\mathcal L(f,P)\\
&\le\mathcal U(f,P)-\mathcal L(f,P)\\
&\lt\epsilon
\end{aligned}
$$

Since $\epsilon$ was arbitrary, $U-L\le0$.

Suppose the latter and fix $\epsilon\gt0$.
There exist $P_1$ and $P_2$ such that

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal U(f,P_1) - U\lt\frac\epsilon2\\
L - \mathcal L(f,P_2)\lt\frac\epsilon2
\end{aligned}
$$

Let $P$ be the common refinement of $P_1$ and $P_2$, the enumeration of the intersection of $P_1$ and $P_2$ as sets.
Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal U(f,P) - \mathcal L(f,P)
&\le\mathcal U(f,P_1) - \mathcal L(f,P_2)\\
&\lt U-L+\epsilon\\
&=\epsilon.
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus $f$ is integrable as desired.
<a href="#" class="btn btn--primary">QED</a>

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Definition </b>

If $f$ is integrable so that $U=L$, define

$$\int_a^bf(x)\,dx=U=L$$

</div>

For complex functions, we have the following definitions

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Definition </b>

$f:[a,b]\to\mathbb C$ is such that $f=u+iv$, then $f$ is integrable on $[a,b]$ if both of $u$ and $v$ are integrable on $[a,b]$ and

$$\int_a^bf(x)\,dx=\int_a^bu(x)\,dx+i\int_a^bv(x)\,dx$$

</div>

It is a fundamental fact that

<div class="notice--success" markdown="1">
<b> Proposition </b>

if $f$ is continuous on $[a,b]$, then $f$ is integrable.

</div>

Suppose that $f$ is real valued.
Since $[a,b]$ is compact (closed and bounded), $f$ is uniformly continuous on this interval.
That is, for each $\epsilon\gt0$, there exists $\delta\gt0$ such that

$$|x-y|\lt\delta\quad\Longrightarrow\quad |f(x)-f(y)|\lt\frac\epsilon{b-a}.$$

Choose $n$ so that $\frac{b-a}n\lt\delta$ and let

$$P=\left(a, a+\frac{b-a}n, a+2\frac{b-a}n, \cdots, a+(n-1)\frac{b-a}n,b\right).$$

Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
(\mathcal U - \mathcal L)(f, P)
&=\sum_{j=1}^N\left(
    \sup\{f(x):x_{j-1}\le x\le x_j\}
    -
    \inf\{f(x):x_{j-1}\le x\le x_j\}
    \right)\frac{b-a}n\\
&=\sum_{j=1}^N\epsilon\frac{b-a}n\\
&=\frac\epsilon{b-a}\cdot(b-a)=\epsilon.
\end{aligned}
$$

Suppose now that $f$ is complex valued so that $f=u+iv$.
Since $f$ is continuous, it is trivial that $u$ and $v$ are also continuous.
It follows that $u$ and $v$ are both integrable and that $f$ is integrable.
<a href="#" class="btn btn--primary">QED</a>


## A1.1 Basic properties

<div class="notice--info" markdown="1">
<br><br>
</div>



